# Deploying Custom Files with Jinja2 Templates

## Templating Files

With Templating Files, you can write a template configuration file that is automatically customized for the managed host when the file is deployed, using Ansible variables and facts. This can be easier to control and is less error-prone.
Ansible uses the Jinja2 templating system and syntax for template files.

## Introduction to Jinja2

Using Delimiters

Variables and logic expressions are placed between tags, or delimiters.

- {{ EXPR }} for outputting the results of an expression or a variable.

Regular vars:

```jinja
{{ hostvars['host']['ansible_facts']['default_ipv4']['address'] }}
```

Filters:

Jinja2 provides filters which change the output format for template expressions

```jinja
{{ output | to_json }}
{{ output | to_yaml }}
{{ output | to_nice_json }}
{{ output | to_nice_yaml }}
{{ output | from_json }}
{{ output | from_yaml }}
```

- {% EXPR %} for expressions or logic (for example, loops and conditions).

Loops examples:

```jinja
Simple loop:
{% for user in users %}
{{ user }}
{% endfor %}

Loop with condition:
{% for myuser in users if not myuser == "root" %}
User number {{ loop.index }} - {{ myuser }}
{% endfor %}

Loop which use variables:
{% for host in groups['all'] %}
{{ hostvars['host']['ansible_facts']['default_ipv4']['address'] }} {{ hostvars['host']['ansible_facts']['fqdn'] }} {{ hostvars['host']['ansible_facts']['hostname'] }}
{% endfor %}
```

Conditionals:

```jinja
{% if finished %}
{{ result }}
{% endif %}
```

- {​# COMMENT #​} for comments that should not appear in the final file.

## Deploying Jinja2 Templates

We use the template module to deploy j2 templates to the managed hosts.
basic example:

```yaml
tasks:
  - name: template render
    template:
      src: /tmp/j2-template.j2 # source Jinja2 template
      dest: /tmp/dest-config-file.txt # file to be created on the destination hosts.
```

NOTE
there are other options such as: owner, group, permissions, and SELinux context, just like the file module. It can also take a validate option to run an arbitrary command (such as visudo -c) to check the syntax of a file for correctness before copying it into place.

It is a good practice to include a comment at the top of the template to indicate that the file should not be manually edited.
Use ansible_managed string inside a Jinja2 template to add a comment:
{{ ansible_managed }}
