# Managing Secrets and Facts

## Ansible Vault
Secrets are used to store sensitive data such as passwords or API keys.
Ansible Vault (included with Ansible), can be used to encrypt and decrypt any structured data file used by Ansible. To use Ansible Vault, there is a command-line tool named ansible-vault. Ansible Vault can encrypt any structured data file used by Ansible such as:

- Inventory variables.
- Variable files.
- Variable files passed as arguments when executing the playbook.
- Variables defined in Ansible roles.

### Creating an Encrypted File

```bash
# Password from stdin:
ansible-vault create secret.yml
New Vault password: redhat
Confirm New Vault password: redhat

# Password from password file:
ansible-vault create --vault-password-file=vault-pass secret.yml
```

This will open up a file in vi editor

** You can set and export the EDITOR environment variable to specify a different editor.

### Viewing an Encrypted File

```bash
ansible-vault view secret1.yml
Vault password: secret

Homepage: http://www.greenwoodsoftware.com/less
my_secret: "yJJvPqhsiusmmPPZdnjndkdnYNDjdj782meUZcw"
```

### Editing an Existing Encrypted File


```bash
ansible-vault edit secret.yml
Vault password: redhat
```

** This command decrypts the file to a temporary file and allows you to edit it. When saved, it copies the content and removes the temporary file.
** The edit subcommand always rewrites the file, so you should only use it when making changes. This can have implications when the file is kept under version control. You should always use the view subcommand to view the file's contents without making changes.

### Encrypting an Existing File

To encrypt a file that already exists, use the ansible-vault encrypt filename command. This command can take the names of multiple files to be encrypted as arguments.

```bash
ansible-vault encrypt secret1.yml secret2.yml
New Vault password: redhat
Confirm New Vault password: redhat
Encryption successful
```

** Use the --output=OUTPUT_FILE option to save the encrypted file with a new name. You can only use one input file with the --output option.

### Decrypting an Existing File

```bash
ansible-vault decrypt secret1.yml --output=secret1-decrypted.yml
Vault password: redhat
Decryption successful
```

** You can use the --output option to save the decrypted file under a different name.

### Changing the Password of an Encrypted File

```bash
ansible-vault rekey secret.yml
Vault password: redhat
New Vault password: RedHat
Confirm New Vault password: RedHat
Rekey successful

OR

ansible-vault rekey --new-vault-password-file=NEW_VAULT_PASSWORD_FILE secret.yml
```

## Playbooks and Ansible Vault

To run a playbook that accesses files encrypted with Ansible Vault, you need to provide the encryption password to the ansible-playbook command with the --vault-id or --vault-id @prompt.

```bash
ansible-playbook --vault-id @prompt site.yml
Vault password (default): redhat
```

Alternatively, you can use the --vault-password-file option to specify a file that stores the encryption password in plain text. The password should be a string stored as a single line in the file.

```bash
ansible-playbook --vault-password-file=vault-pw-file site.yml
```

** You can also use the ANSIBLE_VAULT_PASSWORD_FILE environment variable.

If you do not provide the password, the playbook returns an error:

```bash
ansible-playbook site.yml
ERROR: A vault password must be specified to decrypt vars/api_key.yml
```

To use multiple passwords, pass multiple --vault-id or --vault-password-file options

```bash
ansible-playbook --vault-id one@prompt --vault-id two@prompt site.yml
Vault password (one): 
Vault password (two): 
```

## Recommended Practices for Variable File Management

1. To simplify management, it makes sense to set up your Ansible project so that sensitive variables and all other variables are kept in separate files.

    The preferred way to manage group variables and host variables is to create directories at the playbook level. The group_vars and host_vars directories normally contains variable files with names matching hosts or host groups to which they apply.However, instead of using files in group_vars or host_vars, you also can use directories for each host group or managed host. Those directories can then contain multiple variable files, all of which are used by the host group or managed host.
For example:

```bash
.
├── ansible.cfg
├── group_vars
│   └── webservers
│       └── vars
├── host_vars
│   └── demo.example.com
│       ├── vars
│       └── vault
├── inventory
└── playbook.yml
```

Most variables for demo.example.com can be placed in the vars file, but sensitive variables can be kept secret by placing them separately in the vault file.
There is nothing special about the file names being used in this example inside the host_vars/demo.example.com directory. That directory could contain more files, some encrypted by Ansible Vault and some which are not.

2. Playbook variables can also be protected with Ansible Vault. Sensitive playbook variables can be placed in a separate file which is encrypted with Ansible Vault and which is included in the playbook through a vars_files directive. This can be useful, because playbook variables take precedence over inventory variables.

3. If you are using multiple vault passwords with your playbook, make sure that each encrypted file is assigned a vault ID, and that you enter the matching password with that vault ID when running the playbook. This ensures that the correct password is selected first when decrypting the vault-encrypted file, which is faster than forcing Ansible to try all the vault passwords you provided until it finds the right one.