# Application Lifecycle Management

## Rolling Updates and Rollbacks

When you first create a deployment, it triggers a rollout, a new rollout creates a new deployment revision.
Each rollout has its revision number, this helps us understand which version of the deployment is being used for each container and do a roll back if needed.

```yaml
# Status of your roll out by
kubectl rollout status deployment/NAME

# History of your roll out by
kubectl rollout history deployment/NAME
```

### Deployment strategies

- Recreate - shutdown all pods and start new ones with the new version.
- Rolling Update - replaces one pod after the other.

### Rollback

To roll back to the previous revision we need to run `kubectl rollout undo deployment/NAME`

## Configuring Applications

### Commands and Arguments

When you run a container in a pod you can specify the "args" and "command" fields in the container definition.

- "args" is a list of arguments that are givin to the container entry point, for example if the container entrypoint is the `sleep` command then args can be `args: ["10"]`
- "command" is a list of commands that will replace the container entry point, for example if the container entrypoint is the `sleep` command then then to use a custom sleep command we can use`command: my-sleep`.

### Environment Variables in Applications

We can set environment variables on containers in a number of ways:

- Key-Value:

```yaml
env:
  - name: PORT
    value: 8080
```

- Select a value from a ConfigMap:

```yaml
env:
  - name: PORT
    valueFrom:
      configMapKeyRef:
      name: configMapPort
      key: PORT
```

- Select a value from a Secret:

```yaml
env:
  - name: PORT
    valueFrom:
      secretKeyRef: secretPort
      name: secretPort
      key: PORT
```

- Inject a ConfigMap:

```yaml
# Create a config map:
$ kubectl create configmap <NAME> --from-literal=<KEY>=<VALUE> --from-literal=<KEY>=<VALUE>
# OR from file
$ kubectl create configmap <NAME> --from-file=<Path_to_file>
# Add a reference on the pod definition
envFrom:
  - configMapRef:
        name: configMapPort
```

- Inject a Secret:

```yaml
# Create a secret:
$ kubectl create secret <NAME> --from-literal=<KEY>=<VALUE> --from-literal=<KEY>=<VALUE>
# OR from file
$ kubectl create secret <NAME> --from-file=<Path_to_file>
# Add a reference on the pod definition
envFrom:
  - secretRef:
        name: secretPort
```

** Regarding secrets and config maps, you can also make them available on the file system by using volumes:

```yaml
volumes:
  - name: secret-port
    secret:
      secretName: secretPort
```

## Multi-Container pods

Sometimes you want two services to work together in the same space, for example a logging service and an application.
You can have a couple of containers running inside the same pod:

- They will share the same lifecycle, meaning they are created together and destroyed together.
- They share the same network space which means they can refer to each other as localhost.
- They have access to the same storage volumes, meaning you do not have to establish volume sharing or services between the pods to enable communication.

The containers section under the spec section on the pod is a list and you can add as many pod as you like.

There are 3 common patterns, when it comes to designing multi-container PODs:

- Sidecar pattern:
- Adapter:
- Ambassador:

### InitContainers
In a multi-container pod, each container is expected to run a process that stays alive as long as the POD's lifecycle. But sometimes you may want to run a process that runs to completion in a container, most of the times this is useful to prepare the surface for the other containers in the pod.
For example a process that pulls a code or binary from a repository that will be used by the main web application.
That's where initContainers comes in.
An initContainer is configured in a pod like all other containers, except that it is specified inside a initContainers section, like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: myapp-pod
  labels:
    app: myapp
spec:
  containers:
  - name: myapp-container
    image: busybox:1.28
    command: ['sh', '-c', 'echo The app is running! && sleep 3600']
  initContainers:
  - name: init-myservice
    image: busybox
    command: ['sh', '-c', 'git clone <some-repository-that-will-be-used-by-application> ; done;']
```

When a POD is first created the initContainer is run, and the process in the initContainer must run to a completion before the real container hosting the application starts.
If any of the initContainers fail to complete, Kubernetes restarts the Pod repeatedly until the Init Container succeeds.
