# Managing Ansible Configuration Files

## Configuration File Precedence

1. ANSIBLE_CONFIG environment variable
2. ./ansible.cfg
3. ~/ansible.cfg
4. /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg

## Checking which configuration file is used

1. ansible --version
2. -v option when executing Ansible commands on the command line.

## The configuration file

The Ansible configuration file consists of several sections.
For basic operation use the following two sections:

1. [defaults] sets defaults for Ansible operation

2. [privilege_escalation] configures how Ansible performs privilege escalation on managed hosts

Some configurations to remember:

- remote_user - to specify a different remote user, by default it will try to log in with the user which ran the ansible command via SSH.
- inventory - Specifies the path to the inventory file.
- ask_pass - Whether or not to prompt for an SSH password. Can be false if using SSH public key authentication.
- become - Whether to automatically switch user on the managed host after connecting. This can also be specified by a play.
- become_method - How to switch user (default is sudo).
- become_user - The user to switch to on the managed host (default is root).
- become_ask_pass - Whether to prompt for a password for your become_method. Defaults to false.

## configuring host connection method

By default ansible will use SSH as the connection method, if we want to use a different connection method to a specific host we need to:

1. Create a host_vars subdirectoryin the directory from which you run Ansible commands.
2. create a file named localhost, containing:
   line ansible_connection: [connection method].
