# Ansible Roles

Ansible roles provide a way for you to make it easier to reuse Ansible code generically.
You can create a directory following a standardized directory structure, with all the tasks, variables, files, templates, and resources needed to run the ansible playbook, and call that role from another project
with different parameters.
Ansible roles allow you to group, share and reuse complex tasks, therefor making large projects more manageable.
You can:

- Create your own roles.
- Get them from different packages (such as rhel-system-roles).
- Get community-supported roles from the Ansible Galaxy website

## Ansible Role Structure

An Ansible role is defined by a standardized directory structure. The top-level directory defines the name of the role itself. Files are organized into subdirectories that are named according to each file's purpose in the role.
An example of a role:

```bash
user.example/
├── defaults
│   └── main.yml
├── files
├── handlers
│   └── main.yml
├── meta
│   └── main.yml
├── README.md
├── tasks
│   └── main.yml
├── templates
├── tests
│   ├── inventory
│   └── test.yml
└── vars
    └── main.yml
```

- defaults: The main.yml file in this directory contains the default values of role variables that can be overwritten when the role is used. These variables have low precedence and are intended to be changed and customized in plays.
- files: This directory contains static files that are referenced by role tasks.
- handlers: The main.yml file in this directory contains the role's handler definitions.
- meta: The main.yml file in this directory contains information about the role, including author, license, platforms, and optional role dependencies.
- tasks: The main.yml file in this directory contains the role's task definitions.
- templates: This directory contains Jinja2 templates that are referenced by role tasks.
- tests: This directory can contain an inventory and test.yml playbook that can be used to test the role.
- vars: The main.yml file in this directory defines the role's variable values. Often these variables are used for internal purposes within the role. These variables have high precedence, and are not intended to be changed when used in a playbook.

## Defining Variables and Defaults

There are a number of different variable defenitions:

- Role variables: Defined in the vars/main.yml file with "key: value". They have a high precedence and can not be overridden by inventory variables. Role variables should be used by the internally by the role.
- Default variables: Defined by creating a defaults/main.yml. They have the lowest precedence of any variables available. They provide default values for variables that can be overriden.

## Using Ansible Roles in a Playbook

To use a role in a playbook you just need to call it:

```yaml
---
- hosts: remote.example.com
  roles:
    - role1
    - role2
```

When you use a roles section to import roles into a play, the roles will run first, before any tasks that you define for that play.

When calling a role we can define specific variables for the role:

```yaml
---
- hosts: remote.example.com
  roles:
    - role: role1
    - role: role2
      var1: val1
      var2: val2
```

Notice that role parameters have very high precedence. They will override most other variables.

Roles can be added to a play using an ordinary task. We can use the include_role module to dynamically include a role, and use the import_role module to statically import a role.

```yaml
---
- name: Execute a role as a task
  hosts: remote.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: A normal task
      debug:
        msg: 'first task'
    - name: A task to include role2 here
      include_role: role2
```

### Order of Execution

When calling a role within a play the role tasks and handles are called first, meaning they are added to the begining of the play tasks/handlers list. This could be a problem in case we want to execute some tasks before or after the roles.
To support such scenarios, we can use the pre_tasks or post_tasks sections in the play. Any task listed in this section executes before/after any roles are executed. If any of these tasks notify a handler, those handler tasks execute before/after the roles or normal tasks.

An example of a play that uses pre_tasks and post_tasks:

```yaml
---
- name: Play to illustrate order of execution
  hosts: remote.example.com
  pre_tasks:
    - debug:
        msg: 'pre-task'
      notify: my handler
  roles:
    - role1
  tasks:
    - debug:
        msg: 'first task'
      notify: my handler
  post_tasks:
    - debug:
        msg: 'post-task'
      notify: my handler
  handlers:
    - name: my handler
      debug:
        msg: Running my handler
```