# Writing and Running Playbooks

## Ansible Playbooks

A play is an ordered set of tasks run against hosts selected from your inventory.
A playbook is a text file containing a list of one or more plays to run in a specific order.

### playbok syntax rules:

- Written in YAML format.
- Uses indentation with **space** characters (tab characters are not allowed).
- Usually 2 spaces for indentation, but can be more.
- Can use blank lines for readability.
- Data elements at the same level in the hierarchy must have the same indentation.
- Items that are children of another item must be indented more than their parents.
- Begins with a line consisting of three dashes (---) as a start of document marker, and optinally ends with three dots (...).
- Multi line strings can be written in 2 ways:
  - vertical bar (|) - newline characters within the string are preserved.
  - greater-than (>) - newline characters are to be converted to spaces and that leading white spaces are removed.
  
    ```yaml
    include_newlines: |
            Example Company
            123 Main Street
            Atlanta, GA 30303

    fold_newlines: >
            This is an example
            of a long string,
            that will become
            a single sentence once folded.
    ```

To verify that the syntax is correct we can use:

``` bash
ansible-plybook --syntax-check
```

### Increasing Output Verbosity

The default output provided by the ansible-playbook command does not provide detailed task execution information

1. -v The task results are displayed.
2. -vv Both task results and task configuration are displayed.
3. -vvv Includes information about connections to managed hosts.
4. -vvvv Adds extra verbosity options to the connection plug-ins, including users being used in the managed hosts to execute scripts, and what scripts have been executed.

## Running Playbooks

We can run a playbook with:

```bash
ansible-playbook PLAYBOOK_FILE
```

We can run a playbook as dry-run to see what would have happend:

```bash
ansible-playbook -C PLAYBOOK_FILE
```

## Writing Multiple Plays

If a playbook contains multiple plays, each play may apply its tasks to a separate set of hosts.
Each play is written as a top-level list item in the playbook.
Example:

``` yaml
---
- name: first play
  hosts: web.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: first task
      yum:
        name: httpd
        status: present

    - name: second task
      service:
        name: httpd
        enabled: true

- name: second play
  hosts: database.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: first task
      service:
        name: mariadb
        enabled: true
...
```


## Remote Users and Privilege Escalation in Plays

Plays can overide the user and privileges set on the configuration file.
The following keys are available for configuration within a play:

- remote_user
- become boolean - enable or disable privilege escalation.
- become_method - define the privilege escalation method.
- become_user - the user account to use for privilege escalation.