# Ansible Facts

Ansible facts are variables that are automatically discovered by Ansible on a managed host. Facts contain host-specific information that can be used just like regular variables in plays, conditionals, loops, or any other statement that depends on a value collected from a managed host.
Examples:

- Hostname
- Kernel and operating system version
- Network information
- Hardware information
- Environment variables

Normally, every play runs the setup module automatically before the first task in order to gather facts. By default, you do not need to have a task to run setup in your play. It is normally run automatically for you.

One way to see what facts are gathered for your managed hosts is to run a short playbook that gathers facts and uses the debug module to print the value of the ansible_facts variable.

```yaml
- name: Fact dump
  hosts: all
  tasks:
    - name: Print all facts
      debug:
        var: ansible_facts
```

** To just see what are the facts gathered on the host we can use an ad hoc command to run the setup module:

```bash
ansible demo1.example.com -m setup
```

** To turn off fact gather we can use the "gather_facts: no" paramether in the play, this can speed up the play.

## Creating Custom Facts

Administrators can create custom facts which are stored locally on each managed host.
These allow the managed host to provide arbitrary variables to Ansible which can be used to adjust the behavior of plays.
Custom facts can be:

- Static files, formatted as an INI file or using JSON.
- Executable scripts which generate JSON output, just like a dynamic inventory script.

By default, the setup module loads custom facts from files and scripts in each managed host's /etc/ansible/facts.d directory. The name of each file or script must end in .fact in order to be used. Dynamic custom fact scripts must output JSON-formatted facts and must be executable.

This is an example of a static custom facts file written in INI format. An INI-formatted custom facts file contains a top level defined by a section, followed by the key-value pairs of the facts to define:

```ini
[packages]
web_package = httpd
db_package = mariadb-server

[users]
user1 = joe
user2 = jane
```

The same facts could be provided in JSON format:

```json
{
  "packages": {
    "web_package": "httpd",
    "db_package": "mariadb-server"
  },
  "users": {
    "user1": "joe",
    "user2": "jane"
  }
}
```

Custom facts are stored by the setup module in the ansible_facts.ansible_local variable. Facts are organized based on the name of the file that defined them. For example, assume that the preceding custom facts are produced by a file saved as /etc/ansible/facts.d/custom.fact on the managed host. In that case, the value of ansible_facts.ansible_local['custom']['users']['user1'] is joe.

## Magic Variables

Magic variables are not facts or configured through the setup module, but are also automatically set by Ansible.
Four of the most useful are:

- hostvars - Contains the variables for managed hosts, and can be used to get the values for another managed host's variables. It does not include the managed host's facts if they have not yet been gathered for that host.
- group_names - Lists all groups the current managed host is in.
- groups - Lists all groups and hosts in the inventory.
- inventory_hostname - Contains the host name for the current managed host as configured in the inventory. This may be different from the host name reported by facts for various reasons.

For more information, see [link](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_variables.html#variable-precedence-where-should-i-put-a-variable).
One way to get insight into their values is to use the debug module to report on the contents of the hostvars variable for a particular host:

```json
ansible localhost -m debug -a 'var=hostvars["localhost"]'

localhost | SUCCESS => {
    "hostvars[\"localhost\"]": {
        "ansible_check_mode": false,
        "ansible_connection": "local",
        "ansible_diff_mode": false,
        "ansible_facts": {},
        "ansible_forks": 5,
        "ansible_inventory_sources": [
            "/home/student/demo/inventory"
        ],
        "ansible_playbook_python": "/usr/bin/python2",
        "ansible_python_interpreter": "/usr/bin/python2",
        "ansible_verbosity": 0,
        "ansible_version": {
            "full": "2.7.0",
            "major": 2,
            "minor": 7,
            "revision": 0,
            "string": "2.7.0"
        },
        "group_names": [],
        "groups": {
            "all": [
                "serverb.lab.example.com"
            ],
            "ungrouped": [],
            "webservers": [
                "serverb.lab.example.com"
            ]
        },
        "inventory_hostname": "localhost",
        "inventory_hostname_short": "localhost",
        "omit": "__omit_place_holder__18d132963728b2cbf7143dd49dc4bf5745fe5ec3",
        "playbook_dir": "/home/student/demo"
    }
}
```