# Modifying and Copying Files to Hosts Examples

There are a few modules that help us work with files:

- blockinfile:
  Insert, update, or remove a block of multiline text surrounded by customizable marker lines.
- copy:
  Copy a file from the local or remote machine to a location on a managed host. Similar to the file module, the copy module can also set file attributes, including SELinux context.
- fetch:
  This module works like the copy module, but in reverse. This module is used for fetching files from remote machines to the control node and storing them in a file tree, organized by host name.
- file:
  Set attributes such as permissions, ownership, SELinux contexts, and time stamps of regular files, symlinks, hard links, and directories. This module can also create or remove regular files, symlinks, hard links, and directories.
- lineinfile:
  Ensure that a particular line is in a file, or replace an existing line using a back-reference regular expression. This module is primarily useful when you want to change a single line in a file.
- stat:
  Retrieve status information for a file, similar to the Linux stat command.
- synchronize:
  A wrapper around the rsync command to make common tasks quick and easy. The synchronize module is not intended to provide access to the full power of the rsync command, but does make the most common invocations easier to implement. You may still need to call the rsync command directly via the run command module depending on your use case.

Examples:

- Ensuring a File Exists on Managed Hosts:

```yaml
- name: Touch a file and set permissions
  file:
    path: /path/to/file
    owner: user1
    group: group1
    mode: 0640
    state: touch
```

- Modifying File Attributes

```yaml
- name: SELinux type is set to samba_share_t
  file:
    path: /path/to/samba_file
    setype: samba_share_t
```

- Making SELinux File Context Changes Persistent

```yaml
- name: SELinux type is persistently set to samba_share_t
  sefcontext:
    target: /path/to/samba_file
    setype: samba_share_t
    state: present
Example outcome:
```

- Copying and Editing Files on Managed Hosts

```yaml
- name: Copy a file to managed hosts
  copy:
    src: file
    dest: /path/to/file
```

- Retrieve files from managed hosts

```yaml
- name: Retrieve SSH key from reference host
  fetch:
    src: "/home/{{ user }}/.ssh/id_rsa.pub
    dest: "files/keys/{{ user }}.pub"
```

- ensure a specific single line exists in an existing file:

```yaml
- name: Add a line of text to a file
  lineinfile:
    path: /path/to/file
    line: 'Add this line to the file'
    state: present
```

- Add a block of text to an existing file:

```yaml
- name: Add additional lines to a file
  blockinfile:
    path: /path/to/file
    block: |
      First line in the additional block of text
      Second line in the additional block of text
    state: present
```

- Removing a File from Managed Hosts

```yaml
- name: Make sure a file does not exist on managed hosts
  file:
    dest: /path/to/file
    state: absent
```

- Retrieving the Status of a File on Managed Hosts

```yaml
- name: Verify the checksum of a file
  stat:
    path: /path/to/file
    checksum_algorithm: md5
  register: result

- debug
    msg: "The checksum of the file is {{ result.stat.checksum }}"
```

- Synchronizing Files Between the Control Node and Managed Hosts

The synchronize module is a wrapper around the rsync tool, which simplifies common file management tasks in your playbooks. The rsync tool must be installed on both the local and remote host. By default, when using the synchronize module, the “local host” is the host that the synchronize task originates on (usually the control node), and the “destination host” is the host that synchronize connects to.

The following example synchronizes a file located in the Ansible working directory to the managed hosts:

- name: synchronize local file to remote files
  synchronize:
    src: file
    dest: /path/to/file
There are many ways to use the synchronize module and its many parameters, including synchronizing directories. Run the ansible-doc synchronize command for additional parameters and playbook examples.
