# Inventory

An inventory defines a collection of hosts that Ansible will manage. These hosts can also be assigned to groups, which can be managed collectively. Groups can contain child groups, and hosts can be members of multiple groups. The inventory can also set variables that apply to the hosts and groups that it defines.

There are 2 types of inventories:

- static: defined by a INI-style or YAML text file that specifies the managed hosts.
- dynamic: generated by a script or other program as needed, using external information providers.

## Static Inventory

In a static inventory we list the hosts that we want ansible to manage.
We can list the hosts as IP addresses or via hostname.
Usually we want to organize the managed hosts into host groups so we could select a group of hosts with a specific function, a host can be in multiple groups.

```ini
[usa]
washington1.example.com
washington2.example.com

[canada]
ontario01.example.com
ontario02.example.com
```

We can include groups of host groups with the :children suffix:

```ini
[north-america:children]
canada
usa
```

We can use ranges in the host names or IP addresses to make the inventory shorter, the abover can be:

```ini
[usa]
washington[1:2].example.com

[canada]
ontario[01:02].example.com
```

To verify that the inventory we can use:

```bash
ansible HOST/GROUP --list-hosts
# for example
ansible canada --list-hosts
```

Inventory Location:

- default location: /etc/ansible/host system's default static inventory file.
- Ansible configuration file
- parameter: ansible/ansible-playbook --inventory PATHNAME or -i PATHNAME.

There are two host groups always exist:

- all: contains every host listed in the inventory.
- ungrouped: all the hosts that are not a member of any other group.

## Dynamic Inventory

When working with numerous machines or in an environment where machines come and go very quickly, it can be hard to keep the static inventory files up-to-date.
In a large IT environment we keep track of which hosts are available and how they are organized.
Ansible supports dynamic inventory scripts that retrieve current information external sources, allowing the inventory to be created in real time based on the current env.
These scripts collect information from an external source and create JSON format inventory file.

If the inventory file is executable, then it is treated as a dynamic inventory program and Ansible attempts to run it to generate the inventory. If the file is not executable, then it is treated as a static inventory.

### Writing Dynamic Inventory Programs

If a dynamic inventory script does not exist for the infrastructure in use, you can write a custom dynamic inventory program. This is a link to the ansible doc for writing a dynamic inventory [link](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/dev_guide/developing_inventory.html).
A few thing we should keep in mind:

- Can be written in any programming language, but must have an appropriate interpreter line (for example, #!/usr/bin/python).
- Thw script must be executiable.
- The script should return inventory information in JSON format.
- When passed the --list option, the script must print a JSON-encoded hash/dictionary of all the hosts and groups in the inventory.
- When passed the the --host HOST option, the script must print a JSON hash/dictionary consisting of variables which are associated with that host, or an empty JSON hash/dictionary.

Example of a dynamic inventory output:

``` json
{
   "webservers" : [
      "web1.demo.example.com",
      "web2.demo.example.com"
   ],
   "boston" : {
      "children" : [
         "backup",
         "ipa"
      ],
      "vars" : {
         "example_host" : false
      },
      "hosts" : [
         "server1.demo.example.com",
         "server2.demo.example.com",
         "server3.demo.example.com"
      ]
   },
   "backup" : [
      "server4.demo.example.com"
   ],
   "ipa" : [
      "server5.demo.example.com"
   ],
   "_meta" : {
      "hostvars" : {
        "server5.demo.example.com": {
          "ntpserver": "ntp.demo.example.com",
          "dnsserver": "dns.demo.example.com"
        }
      }
   }
}
```
To display the contents of the inventory file in JSON format, run the ansible-inventory --list command.

```bash
[student@workstation projects-host]$ cat inventory
workstation1.lab.example.com

[webservers]
web1.lab.example.com
web2.lab.example.com

[databases]
db1.lab.example.com
db2.lab.example.com

[student@workstation projects-host]$ ansible-inventory -i inventory --list
{
    "_meta": {
        "hostvars": {
            "db1.lab.example.com": {},
            "db2.lab.example.com": {},
            "web1.lab.example.com": {},
            "web2.lab.example.com": {},
            "workstation1.lab.example.com": {}
        }
    },
    "all": {
        "children": [
            "databases",
            "ungrouped",
            "webservers"
        ]
    },
    "databases": {
        "hosts": [
            "db1.lab.example.com",
            "db2.lab.example.com"
        ]
    },
    "ungrouped": {
        "hosts": [
            "workstation1.lab.example.com"
        ]
    },
    "webservers": {
        "hosts": [
            "web1.lab.example.com",
            "web2.lab.example.com"
        ]
    }
}
```