---
title: "The Ansible Inventory, Ansible zero to hero Part 1, "
date: 2020-06-19T18:38:02+03:00
draft: false

# post thumb
image: "images/ansible/inventory.jpg"

# meta description
author: "Gal Zaidman"
description: "This is the first part of the ansible course, here we inteduce the ansible inventory"

# taxonomies
categories:
  - "Ansible"
  - "Full course"

tags:
  - "Ansible"
  - "FullCourse"
  - "GettingStarted"

# post type
type: "post"
---

# Ansible Secrets

Ansible Secrets are variable files which store sensitive data such as passwords or API keys. We wouldn't want to have the variable file in plain text on our project, so we encrypt it using ansible vault.

## Ansible Vault

Ansible Vault (included with Ansible), can be used to encrypt and decrypt any structured data file used by Ansible. To use Ansible Vault, we use the ansible-vault command.
Ansible Vault can encrypt any structured data file used by Ansible such as:

- Inventory variables.
- Variable files.
- Variable files passed as arguments when executing the playbook.
- Variables defined in Ansible roles.

### Creating an Encrypted File

When we create an encrypted file we need to specify a password which will be the key to the file:

```bash
# Password from stdin:
ansible-vault create secret.yml
New Vault password: gzaidman
Confirm New Vault password: gzaidman

# Password from password file:
ansible-vault create --vault-password-file=vault-pass secret.yml
```

This will open up a file in vi editor

** You can set and export the EDITOR environment variable to specify a different editor.

### Viewing an Encrypted File

We can view an encrypted file content:

```bash
ansible-vault view secret1.yml
Vault password: gzaidman

Homepage: http://www.gzaidman.com/less
my_secret: "yJJvPqhsiusmmPPZdnjndkdnYNDjdj782meUZcw"
```

### Editing an Existing Encrypted File

We can edit an encrypted file:

```bash
ansible-vault edit secret.yml
Vault password: redhat
```

** This command decrypts the file to a temporary file and allows you to edit it. When saved, it copies the content and removes the temporary file.

** The edit subcommand always rewrites the file, so you should only use it when making changes. This can have implications when the file is kept under version control. You should always use the view subcommand to view the file's contents without making changes.

### Encrypting an Existing File

To encrypt a file that already exists, use the ansible-vault encrypt filename command. This command can take the names of multiple files to be encrypted as arguments.

```bash
ansible-vault encrypt secret1.yml secret2.yml
New Vault password: redhat
Confirm New Vault password: redhat
Encryption successful
```

** Use the --output=OUTPUT_FILE option to save the encrypted file with a new name. You can only use one input file with the --output option.

### Decrypting an Existing File

```bash
ansible-vault decrypt secret1.yml --output=secret1-decrypted.yml
Vault password: redhat
Decryption successful
```

** You can use the --output option to save the decrypted file under a different name.

### Changing the Password of an Encrypted File

```bash
ansible-vault rekey secret.yml
Vault password: redhat
New Vault password: RedHat
Confirm New Vault password: RedHat
Rekey successful

OR

ansible-vault rekey --new-vault-password-file=NEW_VAULT_PASSWORD_FILE secret.yml
```

## Playbooks and Ansible Vault

To run a playbook that accesses files encrypted with Ansible Vault, you need to provide the encryption password to the ansible-playbook command with the --vault-id or --vault-id @prompt.

```bash
ansible-playbook --vault-id @prompt site.yml
Vault password (default): gzaidman
```

Alternatively, you can use the --vault-password-file option to specify a file that stores the encryption password in plain text. The password should be a string stored as a single line in the file.

```bash
ansible-playbook --vault-password-file=vault-pw-file site.yml
```

** You can also use the ANSIBLE_VAULT_PASSWORD_FILE environment variable.

If you do not provide the password, the playbook returns an error:

```bash
ansible-playbook site.yml
ERROR: A vault password must be specified to decrypt vars/api_key.yml
```

To use multiple passwords, pass multiple --vault-id or --vault-password-file options

```bash
ansible-playbook --vault-id one@prompt --vault-id two@prompt site.yml
Vault password (one):
Vault password (two):
```
