# 15. Automating Linux Administration Tasks

## Managing Software and Subscriptions

### Managing Packages with Ansible

We manage packages with the yum ansible module:

```yaml
---
- name: Install the required packages on the web server
  hosts: servera.lab.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: Install the some packages
      yum:
        name:
          - httpd
          - mod_ssl
          - httpd-tools
        state: present
```

We can also install package groups, we just need to remember that with ansible, we need to prefix package groups names with @.

```yml
yum group install "Development Tools"

### is the same as ###

- name: Install Development Tools
  yum:
    name: '@Development Tools' 1
    state: present
```

Remember that you can retrieve the list of groups with the yum group list command.

Same goes for modules

```yml
yum module install perl:5.26/minimal

### is the same as ###

- name: Inst perl AppStream module
  yum:
    name: '@perl:5.26/minimal'
    state: present
```

To get information on the packages installed on the system use the package_facts module. package_facts will set the variable ansible_facts.packages to a list with all the package details.

```yaml
---
- name: Display installed packages
  hosts: servera.lab.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: Gather info on installed packages
      package_facts:
        manager: auto

    - name: List installed packages
      debug:
        var: ansible_facts.packages

    - name: Display NetworkManager version
      debug:
        msg: "Version {{ansible_facts.packages['NetworkManager'][0].version}}"
      when: "'NetworkManager' in ansible_facts.packages"
```

There are other modules for managing packages with Ansible, for example the dnf module for Fedora, the apt module for Ubuntu, and win_package for windows. There is also the generic package module which will automatically detects and uses the package manager available on the managed hosts but it does not support all the features that the more specialized modules provide and packages tend to have different names across OSs so you might end up using conditionals for package names.

### Registering and Managing Systems with Red Hat Subscription Management

To entitle your new Red Hat Enterprise Linux systems to product subscriptions, Ansible provides the redhat_subscription and rhsm_repository modules.

#### Registering and Subscribing New systems

The first two tasks you usually perform with the Red Hat Subscription Management tool is to register the new system and attach an available subscription.

Without Ansible, you perform these tasks with the subscription-manager command:

```bash
subscription-manager register --username=yourusername --password=yourpassword

subscription-manager list --available.

subscription-manager attach --pool=poolID
```

The redhat_subscription Ansible module performs the registration and the subscription in one task.

```yml
- name: Register and subscribe the system
  redhat_subscription:
    username: yourusername
    password: yourpassword
    pool_ids: poolID
    state: present
```

** use state: absent to unregister from the system.

#### Enabling Red Hat Software Repositories

The next task after the subscription is to enable Red Hat software repositories on the new system.

Without Ansible, you usually execute the subscription-manager command for that purpose:

```bash
subscription-manager repos --list
subscription-manager repos \
    --enable "rhel-8-for-x86_64-baseos-rpms" \
    --enable "rhel-8-for-x86_64-baseos-debug-rpms"
```

With Ansible, use the rhsm_repository module:

```yml
- name: Enable Red Hat repositories
  rhsm_repository:
    name:
      - rhel-8-for-x86_64-baseos-rpms
      - rhel-8-for-x86_64-baseos-debug-rpms
    state: present
```

### Configuring a Yum Repository

To enable support for a third-party repository on a managed host, Ansible provides the yum_repository module.

#### Declaring a Yum Repository

When run, the following playbook declares a new repository on servera.lab.example.com.

```yml
---
- name: Configure the company Yum repositories
  hosts: servera.lab.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: Ensure Example Repo exists
      yum_repository:
        file: example   # name of the file to create under the /etc/yum.repos.d/
        name: example-internal
        description: Example Inc. Internal YUM repo
        baseurl: http://materials.example.com/yum/repository/
        enabled: yes
        gpgcheck: yes
        state: present
```

```bash
cat /etc/yum.repos.d/example.repo

[example-internal]
baseurl = http://materials.example.com/yum/repository/
enabled = 1
gpgcheck = 1
name = Example Inc. Internal YUM repo
```

#### Importing an RPM GPG key

When the gpgcheck keyword is set to yes in the yum_repository module, you also need to install the GPG key on the managed host. The rpm_key module in the following example deploys on servera.lab.example.com the GPG public key hosted on a remote web server.

---
- name: Configure the company Yum repositories
  hosts: servera.lab.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: Deploy the GPG public key
      rpm_key:
        key: http://materials.example.com/yum/repository/RPM-GPG-KEY-example
        state: present

    - name: Ensure Example Repo exists
      yum_repository:
        file: example
        name: example-internal
        description: Example Inc. Internal YUM repo
        baseurl: http://materials.example.com/yum/repository/
        enabled: yes
        gpgcheck: yes
        state: present

## Managing Users and Authentication

### The User Module

The Ansible user module lets you manage user accounts on a remote host. You can manage a number of parameters including remove user, set home directory, set the UID for system accounts, manage passwords and associated groupings. To create a user that can log into the machine, you need to provide a hashed password for the password parameter. See the reference section for a link to "How do I generate encrypted passwords for the user module?"

Example of the User Module

```yaml
- name: Add new user to the development machine and assign the appropriate groups.
  user:
    name: devops_user
    shell: /bin/bash 2
    groups: sys_admins, developers 3
    append: yes
```

```yaml
- name: Create a SSH key for user1
  user:
    name: user1
    generate_ssh_key: yes
    ssh_key_bits: 2048
    ssh_key_file: .ssh/id_my_rsa
```

NOTE
The user module also offers some return values. Ansible modules can take a return value and register them into a variable. Find out more with ansible-doc and on the main doc site.

Table 10.1. Some commonly used parameters

Parameter	Comments
commen: Optionally sets the description of a user account.
group:  Optionally sets the user's primary group.
groups: List of multiple groups. When set to a null value, all groups except the primary group is removed.
home:   Optionally sets the user's home directory.
create_home:  Takes a boolean value of yes or no. A home directory will be created for the user if the value is set to yes.
system: When creating an account state=present, setting this to yes makes the user a system account. This setting cannot be changed on existing users.
uid:  Sets the UID od user.

### The Group Module

The group module allows you to manage (add, delete, modify) groups on the managed hosts. You need to have groupadd, groupdel or groupmod. For windows targets, use the win_group module.

Example of the group module

- name: Verify that auditors group exists
  group:
    name: auditors
    state: present
Table 10.2. Parameters for the group module

Parameter	Comments
gid	Optional GID to set for the group.
local	Forces the use of "local" command alternatives on platforms that implement it.
name	Name of the group to manage.
state	Whether the group should be present or not on the remote host.
system	If set to yes, indicates that the group created is a system group.

The Known Hosts Module
If you have a large number of host keys to manage you will want to use the known_hosts module. The known_hosts module lets you add or remove host keys from the known_hosts file on managed host.

Example of known_host Tasks

- name: copy host keys to remote servers
  known_hosts:
    path: /etc/ssh/ssh_known_hosts
    name: user1
    key: "{{ lookup('file', 'pubkeys/user1') }}"1
1

A lookup plugin allows Ansible to access data from outside sources.

The Authorized Key Module
The authorized_key module allows you to add or remove SSH authorized keys per user accounts. When adding and subtracting users to a large bank of servers, you need to be able to manage ssh keys.

Example of authorized_key Tasks

- name: Set authorized key
  authorized_key:
    user: user1
    state: present
    key: "{{ lookup('file', '/home/user1/.ssh/id_rsa.pub') }}1
