---
title: "Ansible ad-hoc commands, Ansible zero to hero Part 3"
date: 2020-06-19T00:00:03+03:00
draft: false

# post thumb
image: "images/ansible/adHoc.jpg"

# meta description
author: "Gal Zaidman"
description: "Section 3 of the ansible zero to hero course, explain what is an ansible ad-hoc command, and when should we use it"

# taxonomies
categories:
  - "Ansible"
  - "Full course"

tags:
  - "Ansible"
  - "FullCourse"
  - "GettingStarted"

# post type
type: "post"
---


# Ansible ad hoc commands

An ad hoc command is a way of executing a single Ansible task quickly on one or more managed nodes. Ad-hoc commands demonstrate the simplicity and power of Ansible.
Not all tasks can run as ad hoc commands, only simple commands that can be run without writing a playbook.

## Why use ad-hoc commands?

Ad hoc commands are useful for quick tests and changes that can be done with one task.
Ad-hoc tasks can be used to reboot servers, copy files, manage packages and users, and much more. You can use any Ansible module in an ad-hoc task.
For example: Ad hoc command to make sure that a line exists in the /etc/hosts file on a group of servers. - Ad hoc command to restart a service on many different machines.


## Running Ad Hoc Commands

```bash
ansible host-pattern -m module [-a 'module arguments'] [-i inventory]
```

- host-pattern - specify the managed hosts on which the ad hoc command should be run. It could be a specific managed host or host group in the inventory.
- -m option takes as an argument the name of the module..
- -a option takes a list of those arguments as a quoted string.

For example:

- Determines whether all managed hosts in the inventory can run standard modules:

```bash
ansible all -m ping
```

- Ensure that the newbie user exists and has UID 4000 on servera.lab.example.com:

```bash
ansible -m user -a 'name=newbie uid=4000 state=present' servera.lab.example.com
```

### Gathering facts

Facts are discovered variables about a system. You can use host facts in your playbook.One very useful use of ad-hoc command is just to see all the facts that are garhered by ansible on a set of hosts, this can be used while writing the playbook to understand which variable to use or just to get information.
To get facts we use the setup module:

$ ansible all -m setup

## Finding modules and module docs

Ansible has command line doc command that is really helpful to understand what modules and tasks are available.
ansible-doc -l - to list all the modules
ansible-doc MODULE - to see docs for specific module

## Running commands

There are 3 modules for running arbitraty commands:

- command - the default module, it runs a command on the hosts but doesn't use the shell so stuff like ENV vars, piping, and built-in shell commands will not work.
- shell - module which runs commands from the shell.
- raw - runs commands with a remote shell, so no python is needed on the hosts (useful for hosts which can't have python installed)
