# Ad Hoc Commands with Ansible

An ad hoc command is a way of executing a single Ansible task quickly - simple, online operations that can be run without writing a playbook.
Ad hoc commands are useful for quick tests and changes.
For example:

- Ad hoc command to make sure that a line exists in the /etc/hosts file on a group of servers. - Ad hoc command to restart a service on many different machines.

### Running Ad Hoc Commands

```bash
ansible host-pattern -m module [-a 'module arguments'] [-i inventory]
```

- host-pattern - specify the managed hosts on which the ad hoc command should be run. It could be a specific managed host or host group in the inventory.
- -m option takes as an argument the name of the module..
- -a option takes a list of those arguments as a quoted string.

For example:

- Determines whether all managed hosts in the inventory can run standard modules:
```bash
ansible all -m ping
```
- Ensure that the newbie user exists and has UID 4000 on servera.lab.example.com:
```bash
ansible -m user -a 'name=newbie uid=4000 state=present' servera.lab.example.com
```

### Finding modules and module docs

ansible-doc -l - to list all the modules
ansible-doc MODULE - to see docs for specific module

### Running commands

There are 3 modules for running arbitraty commands:

- command - the default module, it runs a command on the hosts but doesn't use the shell so stuff like ENV vars, piping, and built-in shell commands will not work.
- shell - module which runs commands from the shell.
- raw - runs commands with a remote shell, so no python is needed on the hosts (useful for hosts which can't have python installed)


