---
title: "Configuring Ansible, Ansible zero to hero Part 2"
date: 2020-06-19T00:00:02+03:00
draft: false

# post thumb
image: "images/ansible/ConfiguringAnsible.png"

# meta description
author: "Gal Zaidman"
description: "Part 2 of the ansible zero to hero course, Here we talk about how can we configure ansible and manage configuration files for multiple projects"

# taxonomies
categories:
  - "Ansible"
  - "Full course"

tags:
  - "Ansible"
  - "FullCourse"
  - "GettingStarted"

# post type
type: "post"
---

# Configuring Ansible

Certain settings in Ansible are adjustable via a configuration file (ansible.cfg). The stock configuration should be sufficient for most users, but there cases we will need to change them.

## The configuration file

The Ansible configuration file consists of several sections.
For basic operation use the following two sections:

1. [defaults] sets defaults for Ansible operation

2. [privilege_escalation] configures how Ansible performs privilege escalation on managed hosts

Some configurations to remember:

**defaults section:**

- **remote_user** - to specify a different remote user, by default it will try to log in with the user which ran the ansible command via SSH.
- **inventory** - Specifies the path to the inventory file.
- **ask_pass** - Whether or not to prompt for an SSH password. Can be false if using SSH public key authentication.

**privilege_escalation section:**

- **become** - Whether to automatically switch user on the managed host after connecting. This can also be specified by a play.
- **become_method** - How to switch user (default is sudo).
- **become_user** - The user to switch to on the managed host (default is root).
- **become_ask_pass** - Whether to prompt for a password for your become_method. Defaults to false.

We can see all the configuration options with the **ansible-config list** command.

** It's important to understand that the above options on the default section refer to the initial connections meaning how to connect to the host and the options on the privilege_escalation refer to what to do once you are connected.

## Configuration File Precedence

1. ANSIBLE_CONFIG environment variable
2. ./ansible.cfg
3. ~/ansible.cfg
4. /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg

The recommended practice is to create an ansible.cfg file in a directory from which you run Ansible commands (meaning option 2).

## Checking which configuration file is used

1. ansible --version
2. -v option when executing Ansible commands on the command line.

## configuring host connection method

By default ansible will use SSH as the connection method to all hosts, but localhost.
Ansible connects to localhost with the local connection. If we want to use a different connection method to a specific host, for example use ssh for local host, we will need to:

1. Create a host_vars sub directory in the project directory.
2. create a file named localhost, containing:
   line ansible_connection: [connection method].
