---
title: "The Ansible Inventory, Ansible zero to hero Part 1, "
date: 2020-06-19T18:38:02+03:00
draft: false

# post thumb
image: "images/ansible/inventory.jpg"

# meta description
author: "Gal Zaidman"
description: "This is the first part of the ansible course, here we inteduce the ansible inventory"

# taxonomies
categories:
  - "Ansible"
  - "Full course"

tags:
  - "Ansible"
  - "FullCourse"
  - "GettingStarted"

# post type
type: "post"
---

# Ansible Roles

Ansible roles provide a way for you to make it easier to reuse Ansible code generically.
Ansible role follows a standardized directory structure, that should contain all the tasks, variables, files, templates, and resources needed to run the ansible playbook. The role is called from another project with different parameters.
Ansible roles allow you to group, share and reuse complex tasks, therefor making large projects more manageable.
You can:

- Create your own roles.
- Get them from different packages (such as rhel-system-roles).
- Get community-supported roles from the Ansible Galaxy website.

## Ansible Role Structure

An Ansible role is defined by a standardized directory structure. The top-level directory defines the name of the role itself. Files are organized into subdirectories that are named according to each file's purpose in the role.
An example of a role:

```bash
user.example/
├── defaults
│   └── main.yml
├── files
├── handlers
│   └── main.yml
├── meta
│   └── main.yml
├── README.md
├── tasks
│   └── main.yml
├── templates
├── tests
│   ├── inventory
│   └── test.yml
└── vars
    └── main.yml
```

- defaults: The main.yml file contains the default values of role variables that can be overwritten when the role is used. These variables have low precedence and are intended to be changed and customized in plays.
- files: contains static files that are referenced by role tasks.
- handlers: The main.yml file contains the role's handler definitions.
- meta: The main.yml file contains information about the role, including author, license, platforms, and optional role dependencies.
- tasks: The main.yml file contains the role's task definitions.
- templates: contains Jinja2 templates that are referenced by role tasks.
- tests: This directory can contain an inventory and test.yml playbook that can be used to test the role.
- vars: The main.yml file in this directory defines the role's variable values. Often these variables are used for internal purposes within the role. These variables have high precedence, and are not intended to be changed or overwritten when used in a playbook.

### Variables and Defaults

There are a number of different variable definitions:

- Role variables: Defined in the vars/main.yml file with "key: value". They have a high precedence and can not be overridden by inventory variables. Role variables should be used internally by the role.
- Default variables: Defined by creating a defaults/main.yml. They have the lowest precedence of any variables available. They provide default values for variables that can be overriden.

### Roles locations

Ansible roles can be defined in a few places:

1. ./roles
2. ~/.ansible/roles
3. /usr/share/ansible/roles
4. /etc/ansible/roles

When calling a role from your playbook ansible will look for the role in those directories in that order, so if your role is not performing like you expect it then maybe there is a different role with the same name that have a higher precedence.

## Getting roles - ansible galaxy

You can write your own roles when creating a playbook, but for many command issues there is already a role which exist and maintained.
Ansible Galaxy is a website which contains references to many roles written by large companies or community.

Ansible galaxy has a command line utility called ansible-galaxy which can be used instead of the site, here is some examples of basic usage:

- ansible-galaxy init - creates a directory structure for creating a role.
- ansible-galaxy search STRING - will search for STRING in the role description. we can add options like --author or --platforms to filter by other fields as well.
- ansible-galaxy info STRING - shows information on a given role.
- ansible-galaxy install STRING - downloads a role and installs it.
- ansible-galaxy remove STRING - removes a given role.

## Using Roles

To use a role in a playbook you just need to call it:

```yaml
---
- hosts: remote.example.com
  roles:
    - role:  role1
    - role:  role2
```

When you use a roles section to import roles into a play, the roles will run first, before any tasks that you define for that play.

When calling a role we can define specific variables for the role:

```yaml
---
- hosts: remote.example.com
  roles:
    - role: role1
    - role: role2
      var1: val1
      var2: val2
```

Notice that role parameters have very high precedence. They will override most other variables.

When calling a role within a play the role tasks and handles are called first, meaning they are added to the begining of the play tasks/handlers list. This could be a problem in case we want to execute some tasks before or after the roles.
Ansible provides us the pre_tasks or post_tasks sections in a playbook to support such cases. Any task listed in the pre_tasks section executes before any roles are executed (same logic for post). If any of these tasks notify a handler, those handler tasks execute before/after the roles or normal tasks.

An example of a play that uses pre_tasks and post_tasks:

```yaml
---
- name: Play to illustrate order of execution
  hosts: remote.example.com
  pre_tasks:
    - debug:
        msg: 'pre-task'
      notify: my handler
  roles:
    - role1
  tasks:
    - debug:
        msg: 'first task'
      notify: my handler
  post_tasks:
    - debug:
        msg: 'post-task'
      notify: my handler
  handlers:
    - name: my handler
      debug:
        msg: Running my handler
```

If we want a role to be called in the middle of the playbook we can use the import/include_role. When we call a role with the import/include statement the role is added to a play using an ordinary task. The difference between include and import is that include_role adds the role dynamically meaning that the role is processed as the task is encountered during the execution of the playbook whereas import_role imports a role statically meaning it is pre-processed at the time playbooks are parsed.
More on the differences can be found on the [docs](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.4/playbooks_reuse_includes.html)

```yaml
---
- name: Execute a role as a task
  hosts: remote.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: A normal task
      debug:
        msg: 'first task'
    - name: A task to include role2 here
      include_role: role2
```

## System Roles

The linux-system-roles package provides us a number of ansible roles to perform common administration tasks:

- **linux-system-roles.kdump**: Configures the kdump crash recovery service.
- **linux-system-roles.network**: Configures network interfaces.
- **linux-system-roles.selinux**: Configures and manages SELinux customization, including SELinux mode, file and port contexts, Boolean settings, and SELinux users.
- **linux-system-roles.timesync**: Configures time synchronization using Network Time Protocol or Precision Time Protocol.
- **linux-system-roles.postfix**: Configures each host as a Mail Transfer Agent using the Postfix service.
- **linux-system-roles.firewall**: Configures a host's firewall.
- **linux-system-roles.tuned**: Configures the tuned service to tune system performance.

As an example, the recommended time synchronization service for RHEL 7 is the chronyd service. In RHEL 6 however, the recommended service is the ntpd service. In an environment with a mixture of RHEL 6 and 7 hosts, an administrator must manage the configuration files for both services.

With RHEL System Roles, administrators no longer need to maintain configuration files for both services. Administrators can use rhel-system-roles.timesync role to configure time synchronization for both RHEL 6 and 7 hosts.

### Time Synchronization Role Example

Suppose you need to configure NTP time synchronization on your servers. You could write automation yourself to perform each of the necessary tasks. But RHEL System Roles includes a role that can do this, rhel-system-roles.timesync.

To manually configure NTP servers, the role has a variable named timesync_ntp_servers. It takes a list of NTP servers to use. Each item in the list is made up of one or more attributes. The two key attributes are:

hostname: The hostname of an NTP server with which to synchronize.

iburst: A Boolean that enables or disables fast initial synchronization. Defaults to no in the role, you should normally set this to yes.

Given this information, the following example is a play that uses the rhel-system-roles.timesync role to configure managed hosts to get time from three NTP servers using fast initial synchronization. In addition, a task has been added that uses the timezone module to set the hosts' time zone to UTC.

- name: Time Synchronization Play
  hosts: servers
  vars:
    timesync_ntp_servers:
      - hostname: 0.rhel.pool.ntp.org
        iburst: yes
      - hostname: 1.rhel.pool.ntp.org
        iburst: yes
      - hostname: 2.rhel.pool.ntp.org
        iburst: yes
    timezone: UTC

  roles:
    - rhel-system-roles.timesync

  tasks:
    - name: Set timezone
      timezone:
        name: "{{ timezone }}"

NOTE
If you want to set a different time zone, you can use the tzselect command to look up other valid values. You can also use the timedatectl command to check current clock settings.

This example sets the role variables in a vars section of the play, but a better practice might be to configure them as inventory variables for hosts or host groups.

Consider a playbook project with the following structure:

[root@host playbook-project]# tree
.
├── ansible.cfg
├── group_vars
│   └── servers
│       └── timesync.yml1
├── inventory
└── timesync_playbook.yml2

Defines the time synchronization variables overriding the role defaults for hosts in group servers in the inventory. This file would look something like:

timesync_ntp_servers:
  - hostname: 0.rhel.pool.ntp.org
    iburst: yes
  - hostname: 1.rhel.pool.ntp.org
    iburst: yes
  - hostname: 2.rhel.pool.ntp.org
    iburst: yes
timezone: UTC

The content of the playbook simplifies to:

- name: Time Synchronization Play
  hosts: servers
  roles:
    - rhel-system-roles.timesync
  tasks:
    - name: Set timezone
      timezone:
        name: "{{ timezone }}"

This structure cleanly separates the role, the playbook code, and configuration settings. The playbook code is simple, easy to read, and should not require complex refactoring. The role content is maintained and supported by Red Hat. All the settings are handled as inventory variables.

This structure also supports a dynamic, heterogeneous environment. Hosts with new time synchronization requirements may be placed in a new host group. Appropriate variables are defined in a YAML file, and placed in the appropriate group_vars (or host_vars) subdirectory.

## SELinux Role Example

As another example, the rhel-system-roles.selinux role simplifies management of SELinux configuration settings. It is implemented using the SELinux-related Ansible modules. The advantage of using this role instead of writing your own tasks is that it relieves you from the responsibility of writing those tasks. Instead, you provide variables to the role to configure it, and the maintained code in the role will ensure your desired SELinux configuration is applied.

Among the tasks this role can perform:

- Set enforcing or permissive mode.
- Run restorecon on parts of the file system hierarchy.
- Set SELinux Boolean values.
- Set SELinux file contexts persistently.
- Set SELinux user mappings.
- Calling the SELinux Role.

Sometimes, the SELinux role must ensure the managed hosts are rebooted in order to completely apply its changes. However, it does not ever reboot hosts itself. This is so that you can control how the reboot is handled. But it means that it is a little more complicated than usual to properly use this role in a play.

The way this works is that the role will set a Boolean variable, selinux_reboot_required, to true and fail if a reboot is needed. You can use a block/rescue structure to recover from the failure, by failing the play if that variable is not set to true or rebooting the managed host and rerunning the role if it is true. The block in your play should look something like this:

```yaml
- name: Apply SELinux role
  block:
    - include_role:
        name: rhel-system-roles.selinux
  rescue:
    - name: Check for failure for other reasons than required reboot
      fail:
      when: not selinux_reboot_required

    - name: Restart managed host
      reboot:

    - name: Reapply SELinux role to complete changes
      include_role:
        name: rhel-system-roles.selinux
```

Configuring the SELinux Role

The variables used to configure the rhel-system-roles.selinux role are documented in its README.md file. The following examples show some ways to use this role.

The selinux_state variable sets the mode SELinux runs in. It can be set to enforcing, permissive, or disabled. If it is not set, the mode is not changed.

selinux_state: enforcing

The selinux_booleans variable takes a list of SELinux Boolean values to adjust. Each item in the list is a hash/dictionary of variables: the name of the Boolean, the state (whether it should be on or off), and whether the setting should be persistent across reboots.

This example sets httpd_enable_homedirs to on persistently:

selinux_booleans:
  - name: 'httpd_enable_homedirs'
    state: 'on'
    persistent: 'yes'

The selinux_fcontext variable takes a list of file contexts to persistently set (or remove). It works much like the selinux fcontext command.

The following example ensures the policy has a rule to set the default SELinux type for all files under /srv/www to httpd_sys_content_t.

selinux_fcontexts:
  - target: '/srv/www(/.*)?'
    setype: 'httpd_sys_content_t'
    state: 'present'
The selinux_restore_dirs variable specifies a list of directories on which to run restorecon:

selinux_restore_dirs:
  - /srv/www
The selinux_ports variable takes a list of ports that should have a specific SELinux type.

selinux_ports:
  - ports: '82'
    setype: 'http_port_t'
    proto: 'tcp'
    state: 'present'
There are other variables and options for this role. See its README.md file for more information.

## Creating Roles

To create our own role we start by running:

```bash
ansible-galaxy init ROLE_NAME
```

This will create a directory with the name ROLE_NAME and the directory structure for a role. Now that we have the directory structure, we can start implementing the role.
A good place to start is the ROLE_NAME/tasks/main.yml task file, it is a main list of tasks run by the role.

### Recommended Practices for Role Content Development

Roles allow playbooks to be written modularly. To maximize the effectiveness of newly developed roles, consider implementing the following recommended practices into your role development:

- Maintain each role in its own version control repository. Ansible works well with git-based repositories.
- Sensitive information, such as passwords or SSH keys, should not be stored in the role repository. Sensitive values should be parameterized as variables with default values that are not sensitive. Playbooks that use the role are responsible for defining sensitive variables through Ansible Vault variable files, environment variables, or other ansible-playbook options.
- Use ansible-galaxy init to start your role, and then remove any directories and files that you do not need.
- Create and maintain README.md and meta/main.yml files to document what your role is for, who wrote it, and how to use it.
- Keep your role focused on a specific purpose or function. Instead of making one role do many things, you might write more than one role.
- Reuse and refactor roles often. Resist creating new roles for edge configurations. If an existing role accomplishes a majority of the required configuration, refactor the existing role to integrate the new configuration scenario. Use integration and regression testing techniques to ensure that the role provides the required new functionality and also does not cause problems for existing playbooks.

### Defining Role Dependencies

Role dependencies allow a role to include other roles as dependencies. For example, a role that defines a documentation server may depend upon another role that installs and configures a web server. Dependencies are defined in the meta/main.yml file in the role directory hierarchy.

The following is a sample meta/main.yml file.

```yaml
---
dependencies:
  - role: apache
    port: 8080
  - role: postgres
    dbname: serverlist
    admin_user: felix
```

By default, roles are only added as a dependency to a playbook once. If another role also lists it as a dependency it will not be run again. This behavior can be overridden by setting the allow_duplicates variable to yes in the meta/main.yml file.

IMPORTANT
Limit your role's dependencies on other roles. Dependencies make it harder to maintain your role, especially if it has many complex dependencies.


### Changing a Role's Behavior with Variables

A well-written role uses default variables to alter the role's behavior to match a related configuration scenario. This helps make the role more generic and reusable in a variety of contexts.

The value of any variable defined in a role's defaults directory will be overwritten if that same variable is defined:

- in an inventory file, either as a host variable or a group variable.
- in a YAML file under the group_vars or host_vars directories of a playbook project
- as a variable nested in the vars keyword of a play
- as a variable when including the role in roles keyword of a play

The following example shows how to use the motd role with a different value for the system_owner role variable. The value specified, someone@host.example.com, will replace the variable reference when the role is applied to a managed host.

[user@host ~]$ cat use-motd-role.yml
---
- name: use motd role playbook
  hosts: remote.example.com
  remote_user: devops
  become: true
  vars:
    system_owner: someone@host.example.com
  roles:
    - role: motd

When defined in this way, the system_owner variable replaces the value of the default variable of the same name. Any variable definitions nested within the vars keyword will not replace the value of the same variable if defined in a role's vars directory.

The following example also shows how to use the motd role with a different value for the system_owner role variable. The value specified, someone@host.example.com, will replace the variable reference regardless of being defined in the role's vars or defaults directory.

[user@host ~]$ cat use-motd-role.yml
---
- name: use motd role playbook
  hosts: remote.example.com
  remote_user: devops
  become: true
  roles:
    - role: motd
      system_owner: someone@host.example.com
IMPORTANT
Variable precedence can be confusing when working with role variables in a play.

Almost any other variable will override a role's default variables: inventory variables, play vars, inline role parameters, and so on.

Fewer variables can override variables defined in a role's vars directory. Facts, variables loaded with include_vars, registered variables, and role parameters are some variables that can do that. Inventory variables and play vars cannot. This is important because it helps keep your play from accidentally changing the internal functioning of the role.

However, variables declared inline as role parameters, like the last of the preceding examples, have very high precedence. They can override variables defined in a role's vars directory. If a role parameter has the same name as a variable set in play vars, a role's vars, or an inventory or playbook variable, the role parameter overrides the other variable.


## Introducing Ansible Galaxy

Ansible Galaxy is a public library of Ansible content written by a variety of Ansible administrators and users. It contains thousands of Ansible roles and it has a searchable database that helps Ansible users identify roles that might help them accomplish an administrative task. Ansible Galaxy includes links to documentation and videos for new Ansible users and role developers.


Figure 8.1: Ansible Galaxy home page
In addition, the ansible-galaxy command that you use to get and manage roles from Ansible Galaxy can also be used to get and manage roles your projects need from your own Git repositories.

Getting Help with Ansible Galaxy

The Documentation tab on the Ansible Galaxy website home page leads to a page that describes how to use Ansible Galaxy. There is content that describes how to download and use roles from Ansible Galaxy. Instructions on how to develop roles and upload them to Ansible Galaxy are also on that page.

Browsing Ansible Galaxy for Roles

The Search tab on the left side of the Ansible Galaxy website home page gives users access to information about the roles published on Ansible Galaxy. You can search for an Ansible role by its name, using tags, or by other role attributes. Results are presented in descending order of the Best Match score, which is a computed score based on role quality, role popularity, and search criteria.

NOTE
Content Scoring in the documentation has more information on how roles are scored by Ansible Galaxy.


Figure 8.2: Ansible Galaxy search screen
Ansible Galaxy reports the number of times each role has been downloaded from Ansible Galaxy. In addition, Ansible Galaxy also reports the number of watchers, forks, and stars the role's GitHub repository has. Users can use this information to help determine how active development is for a role and how popular it is in the community.

The following figure shows the search results that Ansible Galaxy displayed after a keyword search for redis was performed. Notice the first result has a Best Match score of 0.9009.


Figure 8.3: Ansible Galaxy search results example
The Filters pulldown menu to the right of the search box allow searches to be performed on keywords, author IDs, platform, and tags. Possible platform values include EL for Red Hat Enterprise Linux (and closely related distributions such as CentOS) and Fedora, among others.

Tags are arbitrary single-word strings set by the role author that describe and categorize the role. Users can use tags to find relevant roles. Possible tag values include system, development, web, monitoring, and others. A role can have up to 20 tags in Ansible Galaxy.

IMPORTANT
In the Ansible Galaxy search interface, keyword searches match words or phrases in the README file, content name, or content description. Tag searches, by contrast, specifically match tag values set by the author for the role.

The Ansible Galaxy Command-Line Tool
The ansible-galaxy command line tool can be used to search for, display information about, install, list, remove, or initialize roles.

Searching for Roles from the Command Line

The ansible-galaxy search subcommand searches Ansible Galaxy for roles. If you specify a string as an argument, it is used to search Ansible Galaxy for roles by keyword. You can use the --author, --platforms, and --galaxy-tags options to narrow the search results. You can also use those options as the main search key. For example, the command ansible-galaxy search --author geerlingguy will display all roles submitted by the user geerlingguy.

Results are displayed in alphabetical order, not by descending Best Match score. The following example displays the names of roles that include redis, and are available for the Enterprise Linux (EL) platform.

[user@host ~]$ ansible-galaxy search 'redis' --platforms EL

Found 124 roles matching your search:

 Name                                  Description
 ----                                  -----------
 1it.sudo                              Ansible role for managing sudoers
 AerisCloud.librato                    Install and configure the Librato Agent
 AerisCloud.redis                      Installs redis on a server
 AlbanAndrieu.java                     Manage Java installation
 andrewrothstein.redis                 builds Redis from src and installs
...output omitted...
 geerlingguy.php-redis                 PhpRedis support for Linux
 geerlingguy.redis                     Redis for Linux
 gikoluo.filebeat                      Filebeat for Linux.
...output omitted...
The ansible-galaxy info subcommand displays more detailed information about a role. Ansible Galaxy gets this information from a number of places including the role's meta/main.yml file and its GitHub repository. The following command displays information about the geerlingguy.redis role, available from Ansible Galaxy.

[user@host ~]$ ansible-galaxy info geerlingguy.redis

Role: geerlingguy.redis
        description: Redis for Linux
        active: True
...output omitted...
        download_count: 146209
        forks_count: 82
        github_branch: master
        github_repo: ansible-role-redis
        github_user: geerlingguy
...output omitted...
        license: license (BSD, MIT)
        min_ansible_version: 2.4
        modified: 2018-11-19T14:53:29.722718Z
        open_issues_count: 11
        path: [u'/etc/ansible/roles', u'/usr/share/ansible/roles']
        role_type: ANS
        stargazers_count: 98
...output omitted...
Installing Roles from Ansible Galaxy

The ansible-galaxy install subcommand downloads a role from Ansible Galaxy, then installs it locally on the control node.

By default, roles are installed into the first directory that is writable in the user's roles_path. Based on the default roles_path set for Ansible, normally the role will be installed into the user's ~/.ansible/roles directory. The default roles_path might be overridden by your current Ansible configuration file or by the environment variable ANSIBLE_ROLES_PATH, which affects the behavior of ansible-galaxy.

You can also specify a specific directory to install the role into by using the -p DIRECTORY option.

In the following example, ansible-galaxy installs the geerlingguy.redis role into a playbook project's roles directory. The command's current working directory is /opt/project.

[user@host project]$ ansible-galaxy install geerlingguy.redis -p roles/
- downloading role 'redis', owned by geerlingguy
- downloading role from https://github.com/geerlingguy/...output omitted...
- extracting geerlingguy.redis to /opt/project/roles/geerlingguy.redis
- geerlingguy.redis (1.6.0) was installed successfully
[user@host project]$ ls roles/
geerlingguy.redis
Installing Roles Using a Requirements File

You can also use ansible-galaxy to install a list of roles based on definitions in a text file. For example, if you have a playbook that needs to have specific roles installed, you can create a roles/requirements.yml file in the project directory that specifies which roles are needed. This file acts as a dependency manifest for the playbook project which enables playbooks to be developed and tested separately from any supporting roles.

For example, a simple requirements.yml to install geerlingguy.redis might read like this:

- src: geerlingguy.redis
  version: "1.5.0"
The src attribute specifies the source of the role, in this case the geerlingguy.redis role from Ansible Galaxy. The version attribute is optional, and specifies the version of the role to install, in this case 1.5.0.

IMPORTANT
You should specify the version of the role in your requirements.yml file, especially for playbooks in production.

If you do not specify a version, you will get the latest version of the role. If the upstream author makes changes to the role that are incompatible with your playbook, it may cause an automation failure or other problems.

To install the roles using a role file, use the -r REQUIREMENTS-FILE option:

[user@host project]$ ansible-galaxy install -r roles/requirements.yml \
> -p roles 
- downloading role 'redis', owned by geerlingguy
- downloading role from https://github.com/geerlingguy/ansible-role-redis/archive/1.6.0.tar.gz
- extracting geerlingguy.redis to /opt/project/roles/geerlingguy.redis
- geerlingguy.redis (1.6.0) was installed successfully
You can use ansible-galaxy to install roles that are not in Ansible Galaxy. You can host your own proprietary or internal roles in a private Git repository or on a web server. The following example shows how to configure a requirements file using a variety of remote sources.

[user@host project]$ cat roles/requirements.yml
# from Ansible Galaxy, using the latest version
- src: geerlingguy.redis

# from Ansible Galaxy, overriding the name and using a specific version
- src: geerlingguy.redis
  version: "1.5.0"
  name: redis_prod

# from any Git-based repository, using HTTPS
- src: https://gitlab.com/guardianproject-ops/ansible-nginx-acme.git
  scm: git
  version: 56e00a54
  name: nginx-acme

# from any Git-based repository, using SSH
- src: git@gitlab.com:guardianproject-ops/ansible-nginx-acme.git
  scm: git
  version: master
  name: nginx-acme-ssh

# from a role tar ball, given a URL;
#   supports 'http', 'https', or 'file' protocols
- src: file:///opt/local/roles/myrole.tar
  name: myrole
The src keyword specifies the Ansible Galaxy role name. If the role is not hosted on Ansible Galaxy, the src keyword indicates the role's URL.

If the role is hosted in a source control repository, the scm attribute is required. The ansible-galaxy command is capable of downloading and installing roles from either a Git-based or mercurial-based software repository. A Git-based repository requires an scm value of git, while a role hosted on a mercurial repository requires a value of hg. If the role is hosted on Ansible Galaxy or as a tar archive on a web server, the scm keyword is omitted.

The name keyword is used to override the local name of the role. The version keyword is used to specify a role's version. The version keyword can be any value that corresponds to a branch, tag, or commit hash from the role's software repository.

To install the roles associated with a playbook project, execute the ansible-galaxy install command:

[user@host project]$ ansible-galaxy install -r roles/requirements.yml \
> -p roles 
- downloading role 'redis', owned by geerlingguy
- downloading role from https://github.com/geerlingguy/ansible-role-redis/archive/1.6.0.tar.gz
- extracting geerlingguy.redis to /opt/project/roles/geerlingguy.redis
- geerlingguy.redis (1.6.0) was installed successfully
- downloading role 'redis', owned by geerlingguy
- downloading role from https://github.com/geerlingguy/ansible-role-redis/archive/1.5.0.tar.gz
- extracting redis_prod to /opt/project/roles/redis_prod
- redis_prod (1.5.0) was installed successfully
- extracting nginx-acme to /opt/project/roles/nginx-acme
- nginx-acme (56e00a54) was installed successfully
- extracting nginx-acme-ssh to /opt/project/roles/nginx-acme-ssh
- nginx-acme-ssh (master) was installed successfully
- downloading role from file:///opt/local/roles/myrole.tar
- extracting myrole to /opt/project/roles/myrole
- myrole was installed successfully
Managing Downloaded Roles

The ansible-galaxy command can also manage local roles, such as those roles found in the roles directory of a playbook project. The ansible-galaxy list subcommand lists the roles that are found locally.

[user@host project]$ ansible-galaxy list
- geerlingguy.redis, 1.6.0
- myrole, (unknown version)
- nginx-acme, 56e00a54
- nginx-acme-ssh, master
- redis_prod, 1.5.0
A role can be removed locally with the ansible-galaxy remove subcommand.

[user@host ~]$ ansible-galaxy remove nginx-acme-ssh
- successfully removed nginx-acme-ssh
[user@host ~]$ ansible-galaxy list
- geerlingguy.redis, 1.6.0
- myrole, (unknown version)
- nginx-acme, 56e00a54
- redis_prod, 1.5.0
Use downloaded and installed roles in playbooks like any other role. They may be referenced in the roles section using their downloaded role name. If a role is not in the project's roles directory, the roles_path will be checked to see if the role is installed in one of those directories, first match being used. The following use-role.yml playbook references the redis_prod and geerlingguy.redis roles:

[user@host project]$ cat use-role.yml
---
- name: use redis_prod for Prod machines
  hosts: redis_prod_servers
  remote_user: devops
  become: true
  roles:
    - redis_prod

- name: use geerlingguy.redis for Dev machines
  hosts: redis_dev_servers
  remote_user: devops
  become: true
  roles:
    - geerlingguy.redis
This playbook causes different versions of the geerlingguy.redis role to be applied to the production and development servers. In this manner, changes to the role can be systematically tested and integrated before deployment to the production servers. If a recent change to a role causes problems, using version control to develop the role allows you to roll back to a previous, stable version of the role.

