# Troubleshooting Ansible

## Log Files for Ansible

By default, Ansible is not configured to log its output to any log file. As an administrator working with ansible you will sometimes want to have a log file for your project. We can configure ansible to output logs to a specific file by:

1. log_path parameter in the default section of the ansible.cfg configuration file.
2. $ANSIBLE_LOG_PATH environment variable.

If you configure Ansible to write log files to /var/log, then Red Hat recommends that you configure logrotate to manage the Ansible log files.

## The Debug Module

The debug module is basically the equivilant of a print statement in the middle of the code, if can help us print variables during a play.
The following examples use the msg and var settings inside of debug tasks. The first Examples:

```yaml
- name: Display a message containing a variable
  debug:
    msg: "Free memory for this system is {{ ansible_facts['memfree_mb'] }}"
- name: Display the "output" variable
  debug:
    var: output
    verbosity: 2
```

## Managing Errors

There are several issues than can occur during a playbook run, mainly related to the syntax of either the playbook or any of the templates it uses, or due to connectivity issues with the managed hosts. Those errors are issued by the ansible-playbook command at execution time.

Earlier in this course, you learned about the --syntax-check option, which checks the YAML syntax for the playbook. It is a good practice to run a syntax check on your playbook before using it or if you are having problems with it.

[student@demo ~]$ ansible-playbook play.yml --syntax-check

You can also use the --step option to step through a playbook one task at a time. The ansible-playbook --step command interactively prompts for confirmation that you want each task to run.

[student@demo ~]$ ansible-playbook play.yml --step

The --start-at-task option allows you to start execution of a playbook from a specific task. It takes as an argument the name of the task at which to start.

[student@demo ~]$ ansible-playbook play.yml --start-at-task="start httpd service"

## Debugging

The output given by a playbook that was run with the ansible-playbook command is a good starting point for troubleshooting issues related to hosts managed by Ansible. Consider the following output from a playbook execution:

PLAY [Service Deployment] ***************************************************
...output omitted...
TASK: [Install a service] ***************************************************
ok: [demoservera]
ok: [demoserverb]

PLAY RECAP ******************************************************************
demoservera                  : ok=2    changed=0    unreachable=0    failed=0
demoserverb                  : ok=2    changed=0    unreachable=0    failed=0

The previous output shows a PLAY header with the name of the play to be executed, followed by one or more TASK headers. Each of these headers represents their associated task in the playbook, and it is executed in all the managed hosts belonging to the group included in the playbook in the hosts parameter.

As each managed host executes each play's tasks, the name of the managed host is displayed under the corresponding TASK header, along with the task state on that managed host. Task states can appear as ok, fatal, changed, or skipping.

At the bottom of the output for each play, the PLAY RECAP section displays the number of tasks executed for each managed host.

As discussed earlier in the course, you can increase the verbosity of the output from ansible-playbook by adding one or more -v options. The ansible-playbook -v command provides additional debugging information, with up to four total levels.

Table 9.1. Verbosity Configuration

Option	Description
-v	The output data is displayed.
-vv	Both the output and input data are displayed.
-vvv	Includes information about connections to managed hosts.
-vvvv	Includes additional information such scripts that are executed on each remote host, and the user that is executing each script.

## Recommended Practices for Playbook Management

Although the previously discussed tools can help to identify and fix issues in playbooks, when developing those playbooks it is important to keep in mind some recommended practices that can help ease the troubleshooting process. Some recommended practices for playbook development are listed below:

- Use a concise description of the play's or task's purpose to name plays and tasks. The play name or task name is displayed when the playbook is executed. This also helps document what each play or task is supposed to accomplish, and possibly why it is needed.
- Include comments to add additional inline documentation about tasks.
- Make effective use of vertical white space. In general, organize task attributes vertically to make them easier to read.
- Consistent horizontal indentation is critical. Use spaces, not tabs, to avoid indentation errors. Set up your text editor to insert spaces when you press the Tab key to make this easier.
- Try to keep the playbook as simple as possible. Only use the features that you need.

## Using Check Mode as a Testing Tool

You can use the ansible-playbook --check command to run smoke tests on a playbook. This option executes the playbook without making changes to the managed hosts' configuration. If a module used within the playbook supports check mode then the changes that would have been made to the managed hosts are displayed but not performed. If check mode is not supported by a module then the changes are not displayed but the module still takes no action.

[student@demo ~]$ ansible-playbook --check playbook.yml

NOTE
The ansible-playbook --check command might not work properly if your tasks use conditionals.

You can also control whether individual tasks run in check mode with the check_mode setting. If a task has check_mode: yes set, it always runs in check mode, whether or not you passed the --check option to ansible-playbook. Likewise, if a task has check_mode: no set, it always runs normally, even if you pass --check to ansible-playbook.

The following task is always run in check mode, and does not make changes.

  tasks:
    - name: task always in check mode
      shell: uname -a
      check_mode: yes
The following task is always run normally, even when started with ansible-playbook --check.

  tasks:
    - name: task always runs even in check mode
      shell: uname -a
      check_mode: no

This can be useful because you can run most of a playbook normally while testing individual tasks with check_mode: yes. Likewise, you can make test runs in check mode more likely to provide reasonable results by running selected tasks that gather facts or set variables for conditionals but do not change the managed hosts with check_mode: no.

A task can determine if the playbook is running in check mode by testing the value of the magic variable ansible_check_mode. This Boolean variable is set to true if the playbook is running in check mode.

WARNING
Tasks that have check_mode: no set will run even when the playbook is run with ansible-playbook --check. Therefore, you cannot trust that the --check option will make no changes to managed hosts, without confirming this to be the case by inspecting the playbook and any roles or tasks associated with it.

NOTE
If you have older playbooks that use always_run: yes to force tasks to run normally even in check mode, you will have to replace that code with check_mode: no in Ansible 2.6 and later.

The ansible-playbook command also provides a --diff option. This option reports the changes made to the template files on managed hosts. If used with the --check option, those changes are displayed in the command's output but not actually made.

[student@demo ~]$ ansible-playbook --check --diff playbook.yml

## Testing with Modules

Some modules can provide additional information about the status of a managed host. The following list includes some of the Ansible modules that can be used to test and debug issues on managed hosts.

The uri module provides a way to check that a RESTful API is returning the required content.

  tasks:
    - uri:
        url: http://api.myapp.com
        return_content: yes
      register: apiresponse

    - fail:
        msg: 'version was not provided'
      when: "'version' not in apiresponse.content"

The script module supports executing a script on managed hosts, and fails if the return code for that script is nonzero. The script must exist on the control node and is transferred to and executed on the managed hosts.

  tasks:
    - script: check_free_memory

The stat module gathers facts for a file much like the stat command. You can use it to register a variable and then test to determine if the file exists or to get other information about the file. If the file does not exist, the stat task will not fail, but its registered variable will report false for *.stat.exists.

In this example, an application is still running if /var/run/app.lock exists, in which case the play should abort.

  tasks:
    - name: Check if /var/run/app.lock exists
      stat:
        path: /var/run/app.lock
      register: lock

    - name: Fail if the application is running
      fail:
      when: lock.stat.exists

The assert module is an alternative to the fail module. The assert module supports a that option that takes a list of conditionals. If any of those conditionals are false, the task fails. You can use the success_msg and fail_msg options to customize the message it prints if it reports success or failure.

The following example repeats the preceding one, but uses assert instead of fail.

  tasks:
    - name: Check if /var/run/app.lock exists
      stat:
        path: /var/run/app.lock
      register: lock

    - name: Fail if the application is running
      assert:
        that:
          - not lock.stat.exists

## Troubleshooting Connections

Many common problems when using Ansible to manage hosts are associated with connections to the host and with configuration problems around the remote user and privilege escalation.

If you are having problems authenticating to a managed host, make sure that you have remote_user set correctly in your configuration file or in your play. You should also confirm that you have the correct SSH keys set up or are providing the correct password for that user.

Make sure that become is set properly, and that you are using the correct become_user (this is root by default). You should confirm that you are entering the correct sudo password and that sudo on the managed host is configured correctly.

A more subtle problem has to do with inventory settings. For a complex server with multiple network addresses, you may need to use a particular address or DNS name when connecting to that system. You might not want to use that address as the machine's inventory name for better readability. You can set a host inventory variable, ansible_host, that will override the inventory name with a different name or IP address and be used by Ansible to connect to that host. This variable could be set in the host_vars file or directory for that host, or could be set in the inventory file itself.

For example, the following inventory entry configures Ansible to connect to 192.0.2.4 when processing the host web4.phx.example.com:

web4.phx.example.com ansible_host=192.0.2.4

This is a useful way to control how Ansible connects to managed hosts. However, it can also cause problems if the value of ansible_host is incorrect.

## Testing Managed Hosts Using Ad Hoc Commands

The following examples illustrate some of the checks that can be made on a managed host through the use of ad hoc commands.

You have used the ping module to test whether you can connect to managed hosts. Depending on the options you pass, you can also use it to test whether privilege escalation and credentials are correctly configured.

[student@demo ~]$ ansible demohost -m ping
demohost | SUCCESS => {
    "ansible_facts": {
        "discovered_interpreter_python": "/usr/libexec/platform-python"
    },
    "changed": false,
    "ping": "pong"
}
[student@demo ~]$ ansible demohost -m ping --become
demohost | FAILED! => {
    "ansible_facts": {
        "discovered_interpreter_python": "/usr/libexec/platform-python"
    },
    "changed": false,
    "module_stderr": "sudo: a password is required\n",
    "module_stdout": "",
    "msg": "MODULE FAILURE\nSee stdout/stderr for the exact error",
    "rc": 1
}
This example returns the currently available space on the disks configured in the demohost managed host. That can be useful to confirm that the file system on the managed host is not full.

[student@demo ~]$ ansible demohost -m command -a 'df'
This example returns the currently available free memory on the demohost managed host.

[student@demo ~]$ ansible demohost -m command -a 'free -m'

## The Correct Level of Testing

Ansible is designed to ensure that the configuration included in playbooks and performed by its modules is correct. It monitors all modules for reported failures, and stops the playbook immediately if any failure is encountered. This helps ensure that any task performed before the failure has no errors.

Because of this, there is usually no need to check if the result of a task managed by Ansible has been correctly applied on the managed hosts. It makes sense to add some health checks either to playbooks, or run those directly as ad hoc commands, when more direct troubleshooting is required. But, you should be careful about adding too much complexity to your tasks and plays in an effort to double check the tests performed by the modules themselves.
