---
title: "Ansible Playbooks, Ansible zero to hero Part 3"
date: 2020-06-19T18:38:02+03:00
draft: false

# post thumb
image: "images/ansible/adHoc.jpg"

# meta description
author: "Gal Zaidman"
description: "Section 3 of the ansible zero to hero course, explain what is an ansible play and playbook and how to run playbooks"

# taxonomies
categories:
  - "Ansible"
  - "Full course"

tags:
  - "Ansible"
  - "FullCourse"
  - "GettingStarted"

# post type
type: "post"
---

# Ansible Playbooks

On the previous post we talked about ansible ad-hoc commands, and saw how to execute a single ansible task. Playbooks take that power of ansible to the next level. Play books allow use to run multiple sets of tasks called plays, define variables and add logic such as conditions and loops.

So to clarify the terminology:

- play: ordered set of tasks run against hosts selected from your inventory.
- playbook: text file containing a list of one or more plays to run in a specific order.

## Playbook Syntax:

- Written in YAML format.
- Uses indentation with **space** characters (tab characters are not allowed).
- Usually 2 spaces for indentation, but can be more.
- Can use blank lines for readability.
- Data elements at the same level in the hierarchy must have the same indentation.
- Items that are children of another item must be indented more than their parents.
- Begins with a line consisting of three dashes (---) as a start of document marker, and optinally ends with three dots (...).
- Multi line strings can be written in 2 ways:
  - vertical bar (|) - newline characters within the string are preserved.
  - greater-than (>) - newline characters are to be converted to spaces and that leading white spaces are removed.
  
    ```yaml
    include_newlines: |
            Example Company
            123 Main Street
            Atlanta, GA 30303

    fold_newlines: >
            This is an example
            of a long string,
            that will become
            a single sentence once folded.
    ```

To verify that the syntax is correct:

``` bash
ansible-plybook --syntax-check
```

## Writing Basic PLaybook

A basic playbook will have the form of:

```yaml
- name: example
  hosts: [pattern from the inventory]
  vars:
    # some variable definitions]
    # ....
  #configurations for example
  order:  # The order in which hosts are selected, options:
          # inventory, reverse_inventory, sorted, reverse_sorted and shuffle
  remote_user: root
  become: true
  tasks:
    - name: task1
      copy:
        .....
    - name: task2
      command:
        .....
```

### Writing Multiple Plays

If a playbook contains multiple plays, each play may apply its tasks to a separate set of hosts and have its own configuration and variables.
Each play is written as a top-level list item in the playbook.

Example:

``` yaml
---
- name: first play
  hosts: web.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: first task
      yum:
        name: httpd
        status: present

    - name: second task
      service:
        name: httpd
        enabled: true

- name: second play
  hosts: database.example.com
  tasks:
    - name: first task
      service:
        name: mariadb
        enabled: true
...
```

## Remote Users and Privilege Escalation in Plays

Plays can overide the user and privileges set on the configuration file.
The following keys are available for configuration within a play:

- remote_user
- become boolean - enable or disable privilege escalation.
- become_method - define the privilege escalation method.
- become_user - the user account to use for privilege escalation.

## Running Playbooks

We can run a playbook with:

```bash
ansible-playbook PLAYBOOK_FILE
```

We can run a playbook as dry-run to see what would happen:

```bash
ansible-playbook -C PLAYBOOK_FILE
```

Ansible Modules should be idempotent, that is, running a module multiple times in a sequence should have the same effect as running it just once this is important re-running the playbook should be safe.

Most ansible modules are idempotent but the command and shell modules will typically rerun the same command again, which is ok if the command just check stuff but if we are changing something on the system we need to be careful and check that it is safe to re run the playbook.

### Increasing Output Verbosity

The default output provided by the ansible-playbook command does not provide detailed task execution information

1. -v The task results are displayed.
2. -vv Both task results and task configuration are displayed.
3. -vvv Includes information about connections to managed hosts.
4. -vvvv Adds extra verbosity options to the connection plug-ins, including users being used in the managed hosts to execute scripts, and what scripts have been executed.